@node player
@chapter Player
When OCP is started with a valid filename the file is loaded and the player
interface is started. This is the main part of OCP and you have various ways
to display all kinds of music information and data.

@section General
OCP displays general (status) information in the first 4 rows. Some of these
entries can be changed by the user, others are static for each module. The
following list will explain every entry.@footnote{Some special file types modify the
appearance of the general field, but only static data is affected.}
@multitable @columnfractions .1 .9
@item vol
@tab The bar display the current playback volume. The default value is
100% or full volume. To change the volume press @key{F2} and @key{F3}. This
will change the volume by one dot each time you press a key. The keys @key{+}
and @key{-} on the numeric keypad will change the volume smoother.
@item srnd
@tab Toggle this option with @key{F4} to enable a simple surround
effect.
@item pan
@tab If a voice should be played on the right speaker you can rearrange
the stereo panning with this entry and @key{F5},@key{F6}. To get mono sound
adjust the two @emph{riders} to the middle.
@item bal
@tab Just like the device on your stereo this option works. Press
@key{F7},@key{F8} to adjust the stereo balance between full left and full
right.
@item spd
@tab The playback speed can be changed with @key{F9},@key{F10}.
@footnote{By default the speed and pitch options are linked (indicated by a
small arrow). To disable linkage press @key{\}.
Note that this will not work with all supported file types.}
@item ptch
@tab The pitch of the file can be altered with @key{F11},@key{F12}
@item row
@tab Most files of the module type are divided into rows and patterns.
The first number shows the currently played row. The second number shows the
total number of rows in the current pattern. All numbers are shown in hexadecimal
format.
@item ord
@tab Modules are divided into several orders consisting of patterns. The
first number shows the currently played order. The second number shows the
total number of orders.@footnote{Not all orders have to be played, as modules
can jump between different orders.} All Numbers are shown in hex.
@item tempo
@tab the current tempo of the file.
@item bpm
@tab These are not the physical beats per minute, but rather the speed
at which the file is played (only valid for module types). This option is
often refered by Trackers as BPM.
@item gvol
@tab Some file formats allow a global volume to be set.
@item amp
@tab This option lets you adjust an amplification. You can adjust this value with
@key{CTRL}+@key{F2}, @key{CTRL}+@key{F3}.@footnote{This is not the same
as Volume and @key{F2}, @key{F3}, because you are able to make the complete
file louder than 100% with this option. Note that setting to values above
100% might harm sound quality.}
@item filter
@tab You can select different types of interpolation by pressing @key{Backspace}:
@item
@tab off - no interpolation
@item
@tab AOI - OCP tries to determine if interpolation is neccessary for each
note and sample indepentantly. This is the default option and should be enabled.
@item
@tab FOI - every sample is always interpolated. This option uses more processor
power as AOI.
@item module
@tab shows the filename currently played and the title of the file
@item time
@tab time since starting the current file
@end multitable

@section Global functions
Below the general information is a dark grey line. On the left side of the line
the current screen mode is shown. In the middle a list of channels. Each file
type has a maximum number of channels played simultaneously. For example simple
file formats as @file{.WAV} can have one or two channels (responding to a mono
or stereo sample). An audio CD always has 2 channels (left and right). Module
file types can have many channels typically ranging from 4 to 32 channels.

The currently selected channel is displayed in light grey. To select another
channel use @key{Left},@key{Right}. You can also use
@key{Up},@key{Down} which will loop through the channels if
the left or right end is reached.

Pressing @key{q} will @emph{quiet} the selected channel. This key is valid in
every part of the player. To enable the channel press @key{q} a second time.
The reverse logic can be accomplished with @key{s}. This disables all other
channels than the selected, so only one channel plays solo. Another hit on
@key{s} will @emph{unsolo} the channel again, so playing all channels. You
can use any combination of the above keys. An example: Select channel 1 and
press @key{s}. Now you will hear only channel 1. Go with the cursor keys
to channel 3 and press @key{q}. As the channel is currently turned of (quiet)
is it now played again. so you hear channels 1 and 3. Now switch to channel 2
and press @key{s}. Now only channel 2 will be played, whiche channel 1 and 3
are turned off again. By pressing @key{s} again all channels are enabled.

You can directly @emph{solo} the first 10 channels by pressing keys @key{1}..@key{0}.
This will act as if you had changed to the appropriate channel and pressed
@key{s}. Channels 11-20 are accessed through @key{ALT}+@key{1}..@key{ALT}+@key{0}.

To pause the file press @key{p}.

The current file can be restarted by pressing @key{CTRL}+@key{Home}. To
move a bit forward use @key{CTRL}+@key{Right}. If a module is played this
will skip the current order and start playing the next order. In other file
types this command skips a certain amount of time, depending on the estimated
playing time. @key{CTRL}+@key{Left} will rewind the music. This is
not possible for all file type (midi or sid files). When playing modules the
current order is skipped and the previous order is playing from the beginning.
To skip a smaller amount of the file use @key{CTRL}+@key{Up} and
@key{CTRL}+@key{Down}. This will skip 8 rows when playing modules.
If the files support jump or loop command using these functions can lead you
to patterns not included in the original play order! Be aware that using these
funtions can lead to somewhat crashed files.@footnote{This does not mean that
OCP itself crashed, but that the order of the music file can be disturbed so
heavily, that the player is not able to play the correct music anymore.}

The next file in the playlist can be loaded with @key{Enter}. If no more files
are left in the playlist the fileselector will be started so you can choose
the next files. However the current module will continue playing. By pressing
@key{Esc} you can switch back to the player again. The fileselector can also
be invoked with @key{f}. The current playlist is shown and can be edited. When
exiting the fileselector with @key{Esc} you can load the next module in the
playlist with @key{Enter}. Leaving the fileselector with @key{Enter} will
load the currently selected module and switching back to the player.

By default a module is looped after its end was reached. You can change this
behaviour by configuring the file selector @footnote{see
@pxref{fileselector, Advanced usage} for details} or with @key{CTRL}+@key{l}. When
looping is disabled the next module in the playlist will be loaded once a
module has ended. If no modules are left in the playlist the fileselector is
started.

A DOS-Shell will be started when typing @key{d}. Note that OCP uses about
200KB so not all programs might start or execute properly. However it should
be enough to make simple tasks like copying, deleting etc. When running under
Windows95 the free amount of memory should be the usual size.

The screen mode can be changed by pressing @key{z}. This will toggle
between 25 and 50 rows textmode, while
@key{CTRL}+@key{z} toggle between 30 and 60 row textmode.
@key{ALT}+@key{z} will toggle between 80 and 132 column mode.@footnote{80x25
and 80x50 textmode are available on every VGA card. All other modes require a
proper VESA bios (at least version 1.2) and may not be available on all cards.}

The current configuration can be ``saved'' with @key{ALT}+@key{F2}. It is
not stored permanently on hard disk, but only valid until OCP is quit. Normally
the default configuration is loaded every time a new file is loaded. This
function makes the current configuration the new default configuration. A
previously saved configuration can be loaded with @key{ALT}+@key{F3}. The
@emph{real} default values are loaded with @key{ALT}+@key{F4}. To modify
the default values permanently you have to change the @file{ocp.ini} file
as explained on page @xref{configuration, ocp.ini}.

An online help is shown by @key{h}, @key{?} or @key{F1}. Use
@key{Pgup} and
@key{Pgdown} to scroll through this screen.

Users of SoundBlasterAWE, Terratex EWS and Gravis Ultrasound PnP can
use @key{CTRL}+@key{F5} and @key{CTRL}+@key{F6} to adjust the
onboard reverb effect. The SBAWE can also add a chorus effect which is
controlled via @key{CTRL}+@key{F7} and
@key{CTRL}+@key{F8}.

@section Text mode functions
The player has two different operating modes. Text mode and graphics
mode. In text mode you can enable various functions at once, while in
graphics mode only a single function can be shown.

Because there can be more than one text mode funtion visible at the
same time you might have to press the according key more than once to
get the wanted effect. Each function can be in one of the following
states:
@itemize
@item
invisible - inactive
@item
invisible - active
@item
visible - inactive
@item
visible - active
@end itemize
When pressing a key the according funtion is made active, but left
invisible.  By pressing the same key a second time the function will
be made visible.  An active function can be recognized by their title
string displayed in bright blue, while inactive functions have their
title string displayed in dark blue. Keys affecting the funtions are
only processed for the currently active mode. So it might be necessary
to change to the appropriate mode by pressing its key once to
manipulate its behaviour.

In the 132 column mode only one of the instruments* and channels*
fields is active and used by the appropriate function. If a function
is not visible the space is used by the other visible functions.

@subsection Channels
The channel function is invoked with @key{c}. The channels appear in
two different modes. By default the short mode is enabled. Two
channels are shown in one row. A grey number shows the channel
number. Left to it a white number shows the currently played
instrument / sample on this channel followed by the note. If the note
starts to play it is shown in cyan for a short while.  The third
number shows the current volume at which the intrument / sample is
played. Behind the volume the current effect is shown.@footnote{All
these informations are only shown when a module or similar type of
file is played.  The nature of file like @file{.WAV} or
@file{.MP3} permits those displays.}  At the rightmost of each entry
the current (physical) volume splitted among left and right output
channel is displayed in a bar graph.

The currently selected channel is indicated by a small white $>$ to
the left side of the channel number. When a channel is muted with
@key{s} or @key{q} it is shown in dark grey. However OCP continues
to play this channel, so that the music sounds correctly when turning
on this channel again.

When pressing @key{c} twice the channel function switches to the long
format.  Each channel now uses a single row as more information is
beeing displayed.  From left to right this is as follows: channel
number, instrument / sample name, current note, instrument / sample
volume, pan position, current, volume.
@footnote{This layout is only valid for module type files. Other file types
like @file{.SID} have a different layout, but basically showing the
same information.}

If the textmode is changed to 132 column mode the channel function can
be displayed in short form at the upper right corner of the desktop.

If there are more channels than space inside the screen area OCP will
scroll automatically through the channel list when you use the cursor
keys. This is indicated by white up and down
characters.

@smallformat
The channel function has no title string which could indicate
if it is active or inactive. So you might have to press @key{c} one
time more often if the channel function was previously inactive.
@end smallformat

@subsection Instruments
If the current file a module (or midi) the used instruments / samples
are shown with the instruments function. The instruments are shown
with @key{i}. Just like channels instruments come in two formats,
short and long.

In the short view only the intrument names are shown giving you space
for two instruments per row in 80 column mode (4 instruments are shown
in 132 column mode). An instrument / sample that is currently played
is shown in bright cyan. If the sample is played ont the currently
selected channel it is shown in bright green. All inactive intruments
are drawn dark grey. If a sample has been played once a rectangular
dot is placed left to the intrument number.

When the intruments are switched to long mode various information is
displayed.  From left to right this is as follows:
@itemize
@item
a number from 00h to FFh giving the instrument number
@item
instrument name
@item
sample number (when using multiple samples per instrument)
@item
sample name (only in 132 column mode)
@item
length of the sample in bytes
@item
length of the loop in bytes
@item
bits per sample
@item
the base note. For modules the default is C-4
@item
finetune value
@item
standard volume at which the sample is played
@item
standard pan position
@item
various flags (volume, pan envelopes etc.)
@item
fadeout value (only in 132 column mode)
@end itemize

Often a file includes more instruments than can be shown on the
screen. Use
@key{Pgup},@key{Pgdown} to scroll through the instruments. If the
instrument function is active @key{CTRL}+@{@key{Pgup},
@key{Pgdown}@} will scroll for a complete page. When inactive you can
scroll single lines by using
@key{CTRL}+@{@key{Pgup},@key{Pgdown}@}. This is very useful if you
have enabled more than one textmode function.

The instrument flags (the rectangular dots left to the instrument
number) are cleared with @key{ALT}+@key{i}. By pressing @key{Tab}
you can toggle between the color mode and pure grey.

@subsection Pattern view
Modules are arranged in patterns. You can view these patterns with the
pattern view function envoked with @key{t}. When enabling this
funtion
OCP tries to display all channels at once using the best display possible. For
modules using few channels (<8) this default display is
normally acceptable, but you might want to change it when playing
modules with many channels.

The pattern is shown in different columns. At the leftmost the row
number is shown in hex. If the screen mode and pattern view allows the
row number is shown again at the right side of the screen. Then follow
some fields for global commands the module might contain. The biggest
section of the screen use the channel columns, each one displaying on
single channel indicated by the number on top of the column. Inside
such a channel column various information can be displayed depending
on the amount of space available. You can see the format of a channel
column in the status line of the pattern view. The format of the
column can be changed by pressing @key{Tab}. As there are many
combinations of screen mode, channels and formats I will not go into
detail here.

The number of channel rows displayed at once can be changed by
pressing
@key{Pgup}, @key{Pgdown}. Normally the pattern view will follow the music
as it progresses. With @key{Space} the pattern view will stop. The
current play position is now displayed with a white special char. You
can now browse through the module with
@key{Pgup},@key{Pgdown}. @key{Space} will enable the follow mode
again, bringing the pattern view to the current play position.

The pattern view displays the different effects used in modules with
different colors. Green is used for effects affecting the pitch of the
sample, while blue command change the volume. Effects drawn in purple
change the pan position. Red colors indicate the manipulition of the
timeslice effected with this samples. Other effects are drawn
white. Please have a look inside the online help @key{h}, @key{?} or
@key{F1} for a complete reference on the effects shown.

@subsection Spectrum Analyzer
The spectrum analyzer uses the fast fourier transformation to gather
information on the audio spectrum used in sample data. The analyzer is
started with
@key{a}. This function splits the sound data into many @emph{bands} of pure
sine waves. This is called the spectrum of the sample.

The status bar of this function shows you the range each bar covers
and the highest frequency processed (the rightmost bar corresbonds to
this frequency).  Use @key{Pgup}, @key{Pgdown} to change the
range. @key{Home} will set the default value of 2756Hz.@footnote{The
highest possible frequency is half the output frequency (22KHz when
playing at 44Khz).}

With @key{ALT}+@key{a} the mode of the spectrum function can be
toggled.  Stereo using two analyzers, mono using only one and a single
mode are available.  In the single mode the currently selected channel
is used as sound source for the analyzer.

@key{Tab} changes the color used for the analyzer.

@smallformat
To get a smooth view the default charset of the graphics
adapter is modified. This is working fine with every graphics card
under MS-DOS. However Windows95 does not allow the manipulition of
characters, so the spectrum analyzer function is not shown properly
when running under Windows95 (window-mode only). If you see a
distorted screen while using the spectrum analyzer function this is
normal.
@end smallformat

@subsection peak power levels
This function shows the current physical volume of the output channels
in a bar graph. You can use @key{v} to make this function visible -
invisible.  In the 132 column mode the levels can also be shown at the
right side of the screen.

@subsection Volume control
You can browse through the different items with @key{Up} and @key{Down}.
If you want to change a value, try @key{Left} and @key{Right}. You can
also toggle between a short mode, a long mode (only in 132 column
modes) and invisible mode with @key{m} (Volume control is disabled in
80 column modes and enabled in 132 column modes by default).

@subsection Module message
Some file types store messages which can be viewed with
@key{ALT}+@key{F9} like in Multi Tracker. If the message is long use
@key{Pgup}, @key{Pgdown} to scroll.

@subsection eXtended mode
All four text mode functions can be displayed simultaneously. This
function enables channel, instrument, spectrum analyzer, pattern view
and volume control function with a good preset in text mode. @key{x}
will enable 132 column mode. @key{ALT}+@key{x} will switch to the
default 80x25 mode with channel and instrument functions
enabled.@footnote{If your VESA bios does not support 132 columns a
80x50 mode is used.}

@section Graphic mode functions
The default graphics mode is 640x480x256. Only one graphics mode
function can be shown at once. The screen therefore splits into the
general window at the top side showing the usual informatin and the
function window covering the rest of the screen.

If you have included a background picture in the @file{ocp.ini} it
will be shown in the graphics modes (expect the graphical spectrum
analyzer).

@subsection Oscilloscopes
The oscilloscopes are started with @key{o} and come in 4 different
modes: logical (the channels are sorted with the default panning
position), physical (channels 1 to n from top to bottom), master
(the mixed output channel(s)) and single (the currently selected
channel is shown).

By pressing @key{Tab} you can enable/disable triggering of the
scopes. If the output is triggered a wave on the screen always starts
with the upper halvwave. If triggering is turned off the wave will be
drawn from the current position.

The scale of the scopes can be altered with @key{Pgup},
@key{Pgdown}.

@subsection Note dots
@key{n} starts the note dots function. Each channel is displayed on a horizontal row. The current note is represented
by a dot or bar. Low notes are placed on the left side. High notes
appear on the right side of the screen. By pressing @key{Pgup},
@key{Pgdown} the scale of the rows can be changed. However the
default scale fits the usual note scale of modules exactly, so there
should be no need to change.

By pressing @key{n} you can alter the output appearance of the
dots. In the modes @emph{stereo note cones} and @emph{stereo note
dots} the current pan position is indicated by the left / right half
of the icon.

@subsection Graphical Spectrum Analyzer
The graphical spectrum function works in two video modes. By pressing
@key{g} you will see the standard 640x480 mode. @key{SHIFT}+@key{g}
will start the spectrum in 1024x768 mode. Apart from this difference
the two video modes are equal.

Pressing @key{g} more than once toggles between the usual stereo,
mono and single channel mode for calculating and showing the
spectrum. @key{Pgup} and
@key{Pgdown} adjust the frequency range. @key{Home} will set the frequency
to 2756Hz. To half the resolution (and yet speed up the calculation)
press
@key{ALT}+@key{g}.

@key{Tab} change the palette of the graphical spectrum. @key{SHIFT}+@key{Tab}
do the same for the standard spectrum analyzer at the bottom.

@smallformat
If you have difficulties interpreting this function here is a
short explanation.  The standard spectrum analyzer at the bottom shows
you the frequency spectrum at the current moment. The higher a single
bar, the louder the frequency. Now imagine looking at this spectrum
from top, now every bar becomes a single dot.  The height of the bar
is now coded into different colors (from black leftrightarrow low
to yellow leftrightarrow high). Now we can draw these point along
the screen and see the spectrum as is progresses over time. This is
somewhat a ``3D'' view of the spectrum, with the frequency coded along
the y-axis, intensity coded in different colors and the time along the
x-axis.
@end smallformat

@subsection Phase graphs
The last graphical function is started with @key{b}. You can toggle
between four modes which correspond exactly to those in the
oscilloscope mode. This function displays the currently played samples
in a phase graph. One full wave of the sample is drawn over the
complete angle of a circle. The louder the sample the greater the
radius of the circle. A sine sample would respond to a normal circle.

@subsection Wurfel mode
With @key{w} the wurfel mode is enabled. It's only purpose is to
display an animation located in the home directory of OCP. The
@key{Tab} key will change the play direction.
@smallformat
To save
diskspace no animations are included in the distribution of OCP.  They
can be found on the OCP homepage (page @uref{http://www.cubic.org/player}).
Animations can be generated with the wap program from bitmap
files.@footnote{See appendix @xref{wap}.}
@end smallformat

@section Using the diskwriter
OCP can write all sound output directly to hard disk. Data is written in
standard @file{.wav} format. You can use this feature to burn audio
cds from any sound format supported by OCP.

Although you can write @file{.wav} files in every possible sample
format you should not alter the default of 44100KHz, 16bit,
stereo. You should disable module looping so each module is written
once onto harddisk. You can disable looping in the @file{ocp.ini}
with the directive @emph{loop=on} in the @pxref{fileselector}
section. You can also change looping temporarily with the
fileselector configuration while OCP is running. See the
fileselector advance usage @pxref{fileselector, Advanced usage} for details.

To enable the diskwriter device you can change the @file{ocp.ini} file
and select the @emph{devpDisk} as default device by moving it to the
start of the @pxref{configuration, playerdevices} directive in the @pxref{configuration, [sound]}
section. You can also select the @emph{devpDisk} device temporarily
by selecting the @file{setup:/DEVICES/DEVPDISK.DEV} device.

Now simply start OCP and select a module to play. You will hear no output
and notice that the module is played with maximum speed@footnote{depending
on your cpu power}. In the directory where you have started OCP (not
necessaryly the directory where the module is located) subsequent
@file{.wav} files named @file{CPOUT000.WAV}, @file{CPOUT001.WAV}
will be created.

@section Using the Compo mode
If you enable the @emph{Compo mode} in the @file{ocp.ini} file all
title and instrument string from modules will not be displayed.

@section MIDI files
OCP is able to play MIDI files. However there is a certain problem. Unlike the
other file formats MIDI does not store the sample information needed to
produce a sound output. The midi file only contains which instrument out of a
set of 127@footnote{a set of drums is defined aswell}
should play which note at a given time. This is the reason why @file{.MID}
files are much smaller than other file types.

This has of course some disadvantages. To hear a MIDI file you need to have
some information how to play the used instruments. Back in the old days the
OPL2 sound chip which was present on the SoundBlaster cards was used to play
the midi instruments. Most people find the sound capabilites of the OPL series
rather limited and midi files were no big deal back then.

Things changed when so called wavetable cards became popular. Those card have
sample data stored onboard in a ROM plus a hardware mixer capable of mixing
several midi channels. The MPU-401 interface from Roland is the de facto
standard for accessing those cards, but this feature is not supported by OCP
yet.@footnote{however this might change in the near future} A disadvantage is
that those wavetable cards only have a very limited memory for sample data
typically 4MB. If you imagine 127 instruments and 64 drums fitting into just
4MB you can guess what sound quality these cards have. Modern cards have normally
much more onboard ROM/RAM, but in our opinion even 32MB are far too less for a
good sound quality.

OCP goes a different way. Instead of using the onboard ROM samples, the samples
needed for a specific @file{.MID} file are loaded on demand from the harddisk
into main memory and then processed by either the hardware mixer (if you have
such a card and the samples fit into its memory) or by the software mixers.
This has the advantage that you can easily change a single instrument, if you
don't like the default sound.

The instruments are stored in so called @emph{GUS-patches}, a file format
introduced by Gravis with their UltraSound cards. At first you have to get a
complete patch set. If you own a GUS classic or GUS max you will probably have
those files already on your harddisk. All instruments are stored in files ending with
@file{.PAT}.

The original GUS patches are found on Advanced Gravis ftp server:
@uref{ftp://ftp.gravis.com/Public/Sound/Patches}

However I recommend looking at the following patch set:
@uref{http://www.stardate.bc.ca/eawpatches/html/default.htm}

If you unpack any of those archives to a folder on your harddrive, you have to adjust the path in the @file{ocp.ini} file. The configuratoin directive
@example
ultradir=/usr/share/ultradir  ; path to ULTRASND.INI
@end example
should be set to the folder where you extracted the patch files. Please check that a file called @file{ULTRASND.INI} is located in this folder, as OCP needs this file, to load the patch files.

@subsection Mixer
If your computer is too slow to play with proper speed remember that the new
Float Mixer is the default device used by OCP when dealing with software
mixing. If you enable the Normal Mixer you will gain a good speed up of your
system.

Look in the @pxref{configuration, [sound]} section of your @file{ocp.ini} file for the
following line:
@example
wavetabledevices=devwMixF devwMixQ (...) devwMix devwNone
@end example
The leftmost device is used as default. So change the line to the following
to enable the Normal Mixer:
@example
wavetabledevices=devwMix devwMixF (...) devwNone
@end example

If you don't understand all this right now, read chapter @pxref{configuration, ocp.ini} on how
to configure OCP.

@subsection Interpolation
If the player still runs to slow you can disable the use of interpolation
with software mixing. Look for the following line in the @pxref{configuration, [sound]}
section of the configuration file:
@example
filter=1
@end example
and change it to:
@example
filter=0
@end example

Now the use of interpolation is disabled. You can enable the filters again
in the player with @key{backspace}.

@subsection still to slow?
If you applied the above 4 tips and OCP is still running too slow, there's
hardly anything left to tune. Remember that graphic modes are generally slower
than text modes. And in text mode the analyzer uses most ressources. If you
only display channels, instruments and track list there's almost no cpu
consumption by visuals.

If the player is still too slow your last chance is to lower the mixing /
playing rate of the player. Locate the following line in the @pxref{configuration, [sound]}
section of @file{ocp.ini}:
@example
mixrate=44100
@end example
Use the table @ref{player, mixingrate} as a guideline to set this value.

@subsection mixingrate
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2
@item 44100 @tab CD Quality
@item 33000 @tab very close to CD
@item 22050 @tab Radio Quality
@item 11025 @tab Telefon Quality
@item 8000 @tab
@file{.au} Quality
@end multitable

While applying those patches please remember that modules with more channels
will @emph{always} need more cpu power than those with few. If your Impulse
Tracker modules (@file{.it}) always click and pop while old Amiga modules
(@file{.mod}) play fine that's normal, because the modern trackers allow
more than 4 channels.

@section Key Reference
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item
@key{ESC}
@tab
quit the player
@item
@key{F1}
@tab
help
@item
@key{F2}, @key{F3}
@tab
volume up/down
@item
@key{CTRL}+@{@key{F2}, @key{F3}@}
@tab
change amplification
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{F2}
@tab
@emph{save} current configuration
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{F3}
@tab
load previously saved configuration
@item
@key{F4}
@tab
surround on/off
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{F4}
@tab
load default configuration
@item
@key{F5}, @key{F6}
@tab
change panning
@item
@key{CTRL}+@{@key{F5}, @key{F6}@}
@tab
adjust reverb
@item
@key{F7}, @key{F8}
@tab
change balance
@item
@key{CTRL}+@{@key{F7}, @key{F8}@}
@tab
adjust chorus
@item
@key{F9}, @key{F10}
@tab
change speed
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{F9}
@tab
song message
@item
@key{F11}, @key{F12}
@tab
change pitch
@item
@key{F11}
@tab
toggle between 6581 and 8580 (sidplayer only)
@item
@key{F12}
@tab
toggle between PAL and NTSC (sidplayer only)
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{F12}
@tab
(un)lock speed and pitch
@item
@key{1}..@key{0}
@tab
solo channel 1..10
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{1}..@key{0}
@tab
solo channel 11..20
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{1}..@key{0}
@tab
solo channel 21..30
@item
@key{a}
@tab
textmode spectrum analyzer
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{a}
@tab
toggle analyzer mode
@item
@key{b}
@tab
phase graphs
@item
@key{c}
@tab
channel mode
@item
@key{d}
@tab
goto DOS
@item
@key{f}
@tab
goto fileselector
@item
@key{g}
@tab
graphic spectrum analyzer
@item
@key{SHIFT}+@key{g}
@tab
graphic spectrum analyzer in 1024x768
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{g}
@tab
toggle fast/fine algorithm
@item
@key{h}
@tab
help
@item
@key{i}
@tab
instrument mode
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{i}
@tab
instrument mode colors on/off
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{i}
@tab
remove @emph{played} dots
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{j}
@tab
same as @key{Enter}
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{l}
@tab
song looping on/off
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{l}
@tab
pattern looping on/off
@item
@key{m}
@tab
volume control
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{m}
@tab
same as @key{Enter}
@item
@key{n}
@tab
note dots
@item
@key{o}
@tab
oscilloscopes mode
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{o}
@tab
behaves like @key{Tab} in this mode
@item
@key{p}
@tab
pause
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{p}
@tab
pause screen
@item
@key{q}
@tab
quiet current channel
@item
@key{s}
@tab
solo current channel
@item
@key{t}
@tab
track/pattern mode
@item
@key{v}
@tab
peak power level mode
@item
@key{w}
@tab
wurfel mode
@item
@key{x}
@tab
eXtended mode
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{x}
@tab
normal mode
@item
@key{z}
@tab
toggle between 25/50 or 30/60 rows
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{z}
@tab
change between 25/50 and 30/60 rows
@item
@key{ALT}+@key{z}
@tab
change between 80 and 132 column mode
@item
@key{Enter}
@tab
play next song in playlist
@item
@key{Space}
@tab
stop pattern mode flow
@item
@key{Pause}
@tab
pause screen output
@item
@key{Backspace}
@tab
toggle filter
@item
@key{Tab}
@tab
change option of the activated mode
@item
@key{'}
@tab
link view
@c @item
@c @key{°}
@c @tab
@c make screenshot
@item
@key{,}, @key{.}
@tab
fine panning
@item
@key{+}, @key{-}
@tab
fine volume
@item
@key{*}, @key{/}
@tab
fine balance
@item
@key{Right}, @key{Left}, @key{Up}, @key{Down}
@tab
change current channel
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{Right}
@tab
skip the current pattern
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{Left}
@tab
restart current pattern / goto previous pattern
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{Down}
@tab
skip 8 rows
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{Up}
@tab
skip -8 rows
@item
@key{Ins}
@tab
goto fileselector
@item
@key{Pgup}, @key{Pgdown}
@tab
scroll in current window
@item
@key{CTRL}+@{@key{Pgup}, @key{Pgdown}@}
@tab
scroll in instruments window (eXtended mode)
@item
@key{Home}, @key{End}
@tab
goto top/bottom of current window
@item
@key{CTRL}+@key{Home}
@tab
restart song
@end multitable
